PEP 817: collected updates (for discussion) (#34)
wheelnext/peps: peps/pep-0817.rst

non-variant wheels as well.

Outline of tool behavior
------------------------

Installing a package from remote index
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> When asked to install a package from a remote index, the proposed

Reviewer: I'd make this "install a version of a package from an index", it matches more what package managers do

behavior would be to:

1. Query the remote index for the package in question.
2. Initially select a package version meeting the version constraints,

>    as usual.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add: _(this does not take variant metadata into account)_

3. Filter available wheels based on Platform Compatibility Tags.

> 4. Determine if among the remaining wheels any feature variant labels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Determine if any of the remaining wheels are variant wheels.
```

or: (Determine if any of the remaining wheels have variant labels.)

   If not, proceed as with non-variant wheels.
5. If any wheels feature variant labels, download the index-level
   variant metadata file, ``{name}-{version}-variants.json``. If this
   file is missing, assume all variant wheels are incompatible and
   proceed as with non-variant wheels.
6. Map the variant labels into sets of variant properties using the
   index-level variant metadata file. If any of the labels present in
   wheel filenames are missing in the file, assume that the respective
   wheels are incompatible.
7. Obtain the ordered lists of supported variant properties using
   providers specified in the index-level variant metadata file:

   - for enabled AoT providers, obtain them from static property data in
     the index-level variant metadata file.
   - for enabled install-time providers, use user-provided property
     compatibility information if provided
   - otherwise, for enabled install-time providers that are vendored or
     reimplemented in the installer, query them in

>      implementation-speciifc manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     implementation-specific manner.
```

   - for the remaining enabled install-time providers that were vetted
     for installation, install them in an isolated environment and query

>      them via the plugin API.

Reviewer: I'd make the fork here clearer that if a provider is an install-time provider, and trust has not been established, either because the provider is part of the installer/vendored/reimplemented or because the user opted-in, do not run the provider and either consider the variants incompatible or fail the installation.

Author: Not sure if "fail the installation" will actually fly, but I'll add that for now.

Author: (I'm replacing this with a deeply nested tree, hopefully clearer.)

   - for disabled providers (e.g. opt-in providers that were not enabled
     by the user, providers excluded via environment markers, providers
     not considered secure, etc.), assume that all variant properties
     are incompatible.
8. Filter and order variants based on the lists of supported properties.

>    Select the most preferred variant.

Reviewer: If no variant wheel matched, use the non-variant wheels by their rules.

do that is to use backend-defined keys in the ``config_settings``
dictionary passed to the build backend hooks.

When building a variant wheel, the proposed behavior for the build
backend would be to:

1. Read variant provider metadata from ``pyproject.toml``.
2. Verify that all namespaces specified in the user-defined variant
   properties have a corresponding provider in the metadata.
3. In the ``get_requires_for_build_wheel()`` hook, return variant
   provider plugin packages along with other build dependencies.
4. In the ``build_wheel()`` hook, query the provider plugins
   ``get_all_configs()`` function to obtain all valid property keys and
   values. Use it to verify that the specified properties are correct.
5. Convert the variant metadata from ``pyproject.toml`` to JSON, append
   the mapping from variant label to variant properties and write the
   result into the wheel's ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` file.
6. Build the wheel as usual, except for including the
   ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` and the variant label in the filename.

Publishing variant wheels on an index
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> An index with full support for variant wheels should ideally generate

Reviewer: My preference is generating the file locally, and uploading it similar to the other artifacts. This avoids modifying the `{name}-{version}-variants.json` on the index, allowing to hash it on the client.

I don't really see the case of adding additional builds to a release, the best practice is releasing from CI and having CI build all the wheels.

Author: I think index-level support will lower the barrier for adoption. Besides, at least some CI workflows upload individual wheels separately. Generating the file locally would require people to recombine them first.

Modification here is merely a matter of a single upload session. Perhaps I could make this less ambiguous if I suggest that it can either be updated on-the-fly as wheels are uploaded *or* after the upload session is closed.

Reviewer: This would be solved by PEP 694, but that's coming along slowly. The part I'm worried about is that updating the file on the index means that we can't put a hash of the variants.json in the lockfile (which we use for reproducibility and security, as something that's a widely understood by developers), and that without the file being fixed, we'd have to do cache revalidation for it.

There are solutions such as checking whether the version of the file you have has an entry for the wheel your looking at, but those seem complex in comparison to twine or uv publish generating the file.

We can also punt on making a decision here, or put it in open questions, this doesn't seem like a fail or pass question for the overall design.

Author: I don't think that's really that much of a problem: in general, I dare say the upload window should be relatively narrow. If people really lock onto the partial variants file (which is a problem in itself), they just need to update the hashes, right?

I mean, it's the same kind of problem as if you locked into the package *before* `*-variants.json` were uploaded, and therefore ended up using the regular wheel.

Reviewer 2: An open question and a brief mention in that open question of PEP 694 seems reasonable to me. 

This partial locking will happen enough for it to matter. We saw the same kind of issue when uploading sdist before wheels. Very quick calculation: current download rate for `numpy` is >300 wheels per second. So a few minutes delay is still a lot of potential users.

Author: For now, I'm going to rephrase this section to make the risk much clearer, and look at other sections where we mention these files.

non-variant wheels as well.

Outline of tool behavior
------------------------

Installing a package from an index
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

When asked to install a version of a package from an index, the proposed
behavior would be to:

1. Query the remote index for the package in question.
2. Initially select a package version meeting the version constraints,
   as usual (this does not take variant metadata into account).

> 3. Filter available wheels based on Platform Compatibility Tags.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. **[Unchanged]** Filter available wheels (for resolved version) based on Platform Compatibility Tags.
```

Reviewer: PEPs use bold text sparingly, if at all - We need to follow the PEP style of writing!

4. Determine if any of the remaining wheels are variant wheels.

>    If not, proceed as with non-variant wheels.

Reviewer 3: There should be a `If not, proceed as with non-variant wheels` and JUMP TO STEP XYZ

Reviewer: That's an exit branch, the procedure for non-variant wheels is already well-known to the reader, it's well-documented in the existing specs and implemented by a number of tools.

> 5. If any wheels feature variant labels, download the index-level

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. **[New Variant Step]** If any wheels feature variant labels, download the index-level
```

non-variant wheels as well.

Outline of tool behavior

> ------------------------

Reviewer 2: How about this?

```suggestion
Suggested implementation logic per type of packaging tool
---------------------------------------------------------
```

Installing a package from an index
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

    .. figure:: pep-0817/conceptual_diagram_installers.svg
        :target: _images/conceptual_diagram_installers.svg
        :alt: TODO.

        A conceptual diagram of installing a wheel.

When asked to install a version of a package from an index, the proposed
behavior would be to:

1. Query the remote index for the package in question.
2. Initially select a package version meeting the version constraints,

>    as usual (this does not take variant metadata into account).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   as usual.
```

We don't actually ban people from looking at variant metadata for version selection, it's just not the approach that most projects will take.

Author: Well, that's the sentence @rgommers just added. I think it's fine to keep it, this is an example and not the specification. Nobody forbids you from implementing things differently, and I think it makes sense to highlight that version selection does not need to be driven by variants, to avoid the worry that people now *have to* download all that metadata.

Reviewer 2: Can do "does not take" -> "does not need to take" if that helps. I'd keep it indeed, since it's a clarification for something people assumed wrongly

6. Build the wheel as usual, except for including the
   ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` and the variant label in the filename.

Publishing variant wheels on an index
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

An index with full support for variant wheels should ideally generate
the index-level ``{name}-{version}-variants.json`` file for every
package version itself:

1. For the first variant wheel for a given package version, copy the
   data from its ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` file.
2. For subsequent wheels, merge the data from their
   ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` files into the existing data:

   - disjoint keys of ``providers``, ``static-properties`` and
     ``variants`` dictionaries are merge together
   - common keys of these dictionaries must have exactly the same value
   - ``default-priorities.namespace`` list can be replaced if the new
     value starts with the old value
   - ``default-priorities.feature`` and ``default-priorities.value``
     keys can be added if they were not present in the previous
     ``default-priorities.namespace`` value
   - other keys must have exactly the same value

If possible, the index should defer publishing the file until the upload

> session is finished, to avoid clients fetching partial data.

Reviewer 2: Ah, here is where PEP 694 fits in

non-variant wheels as well.

Suggested implementation logic per type of packaging tool
---------------------------------------------------------

Installing a package from an index
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

    .. figure:: pep-0817/conceptual_diagram_installers.svg
        :target: _images/conceptual_diagram_installers.svg
        :alt: TODO.

        A conceptual diagram of installing a wheel.

When asked to install a version of a package from an index, the proposed
behavior would be to:

> 1. Query the remote index for the package in question.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **[Unchanged]** Query the remote index for the package in question.
```

I think it's nice to provide - here no modification, etc.

> 2. Initially select a package version meeting the version constraints,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. **[Unchanged]** Resolve the package version meeting the version constraints,
```

I would replace by smthg along the line of "resolve the package exactly as normal - no change expected".

- use the word: `resolve`
- state very loudly & clearly => variant has no impact on package version resolution

   as usual (this does not need to take variant metadata into account).
3. Filter available wheels based on Platform Compatibility Tags.

> 4. Determine if any of the remaining wheels are variant wheels.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. **[New Variant Step]** Determine if any of the remaining wheels are variant wheels.
```

   If not, proceed as with non-variant wheels.
5. If any wheels feature variant labels, download the index-level
   variant metadata file, ``{name}-{version}-variants.json``. If this
   file is missing, assume all variant wheels are incompatible and

>    proceed as with non-variant wheels.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   proceed as with non-variant wheels and jump to **step 10**.
```

> 6. Map the variant labels into sets of variant properties using the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
6. **[New Variant Step]** Map the variant labels into sets of variant properties using the
```

   index-level variant metadata file. If any of the labels present in
   wheel filenames are missing in the file, assume that the respective

>    wheels are incompatible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   wheels are incompatible. **We encourage installers to adopt `variantlib` that provides a reference implementation of this step.**
```

> 7. Obtain the ordered lists of supported variant properties using

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. **[New Variant Step]** Obtain the ordered lists of supported variant properties using
```

>    providers specified in the index-level variant metadata file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   providers specified in the index-level variant metadata file.  **We encourage installers to adopt `variantlib` that provides a reference implementation of this step.**:
```

   - for the enabled AoT providers, obtain them from static property
     data in the index-level variant metadata file.
   - for the enabled install-time providers:

     - if the user provided static compatibility information, use that.
     - otherwise, if the provider is vendored or reimplemented, query it
       in implementation-specific manner.
     - otherwise, if the Python provider package is considered secure
       (either by the installer or via explicit user opt-in), install it
       in an isolated environment, and query it via the plugin API.
     - if none of the above applies, do not run the provider and either
       consider the variant properties incompatible, or fail the
       installation.

   - for the disabled providers (e.g. opt-in providers that were not
     enabled by the user, providers excluded via environment markers),
     assume that all variant properties in the namespace are
     incompatible.

> 8. Filter and order variants based on the lists of supported properties,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
8. **[New Variant Step]** Filter and order variants based on the lists of supported properties,
```

   and select the most preferred variant. If no variant wheel matched,

>    use the non-variant wheels by their rules.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   use the non-variant wheels by their rules.  **We encourage installers to adopt `variantlib` that provides a reference implementation of this step.**
```

> 9. If multiple wheels for a given version share the same variant label,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
9. **[New Variant Step]** If multiple wheels for a given version share the same variant label,
```

   order them by Platform compatibility tags and build number, and
   select the best wheel.

> 

Reviewer 3: 10. **[Unchanged]** Proceed with installation of the best matching and selected wheel (variant or not).

Installing a local wheel
''''''''''''''''''''''''

When asked to install a local wheel file, the proposed behavior would be
to:

1. If no variant label is present in the filename, proceed as with
   non-variant wheels.
2. Verify the wheel compatibility via Platform compatibility tags.

> 3. Read variant metadata from ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` inside the

Reviewer 3: ## Important !

I think it's a bad idea honestly - I'm with you that "this should be ideal". However ... People will massively object.

If someone elects to manually install `ABC` => just give it to them as long as the platform tags are valid. If they make a mistake it's on them.

It's breaking a core assumption of the installer that if I'm doing `pip install package.whl` now I have to install a provider first ... And this will be **VERY** difficult to win ... Let's just drop this...

You ask A => You get A. If you mess up, that's on you

Reviewer: This is a tool decision, this overview list show the behavior of how tools act today already and is the default that at least uv will implement (we will reject non-matching variants by default).

```
$ pip install numpy-2.4.2-pp311-pypy311_pp73-win_amd64.whl
ERROR: numpy-2.4.2-pp311-pypy311_pp73-win_amd64.whl is not a supported wheel on this platform.
$ uv pip install numpy-2.4.2-pp311-pypy311_pp73-win_amd64.whl
  × No solution found when resolving dependencies:
  ╰─▶ Because only numpy==2.4.2 is available and numpy==2.4.2 has no wheels with a matching Python version tag
      (e.g., `cp314`), we can conclude that all versions of numpy cannot be used.
      And because you require numpy, we can conclude that your requirements are unsatisfiable.
```

   wheel file.
4. Obtain the ordered lists of supported variant properties, as when
   `installing a package from an index`_.
5. Verify the wheel compatibility via supported properties.

Building a variant wheel
''''''''''''''''''''''''

In order to build a variant wheel, the build backend needs to receive a

> list of variant properties and a variant label. The recommended way to

Reviewer 3: I'm hesitant about this entire paragraph. 

In theory - YES. Though I still doubt this will be the main way to build variants (at least initially) and I suspect tools like `variant-repack` will become very popular.

I feel this entire paragraph is just too complicated as a whole.

Reviewer: If our goal is first-class variant support, rather than variants as an afterthought, build backends should be the primary interface. Torch probably won't be helped by this with their enormously complicated build system, but most other projects can be support without increasing the "yet another tool" problem.

Reviewer 2: I agree, `variant-repack` cannot be the primary thing here, it's a helper for when variant builds effectively already exist or when a build backend doesn't yet have proper support.

Reviewer 2: I re-read the section, it seems to the point, there aren't steps that should be left out. I suggest resolving this comment.

do that is to use backend-defined keys in the ``config_settings``
dictionary passed to the build backend hooks.

When building a variant wheel, the proposed behavior for the build
backend would be to:

1. Read variant provider metadata from ``pyproject.toml``.
2. Verify that all namespaces specified in the user-defined variant
   properties have a corresponding provider in the metadata.
3. In the ``get_requires_for_build_wheel()`` hook, return variant
   provider plugin packages along with other build dependencies.
4. In the ``build_wheel()`` hook, query the provider plugins
   ``get_all_configs()`` function to obtain all valid property keys and
   values. Use it to verify that the specified properties are correct.
5. Convert the variant metadata from ``pyproject.toml`` to JSON, append
   the mapping from variant label to variant properties and write the
   result into the wheel's ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` file.
6. Build the wheel as usual, except for including the
   ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` and the variant label in the filename.

Publishing variant wheels on an index
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> Variant wheels are uploaded to an index just like regular wheels.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Variant wheels are uploaded to an index just like regular wheels.**

```

Added line break is intentional

There are two possible approaches to publishing the index-level
``{name}-{version}-variants.json`` file for every package version:
it can either be prepared and uploaded by the user, or it can be
generated automatically by the index.

The file should not be changed once it is published, as clients may have
already cached it or locked to the existing hash. For this reason, if
the index is responsible for generating the file, it should use some
mechanism to defer publishing it until the release is fully uploaded
(for example, :pep:`694`).

To generate the ``{name}-{version}-variants.json`` file:

1. For the first variant wheel for a given package version, copy the
   data from its ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` file.

> 2. For subsequent wheels, merge the data from their

Reviewer 3: Add that `variantlib` exposes all the tooling to do this step in one API call.

The `Providers`_ section of the specification provides further
suggestions that aim to improve both security and the user experience.
Particularly, it is expected that the most popular provider plugins will
be available out of the box, and a dedicated team of maintainers
(initially including a subset of the PEP authors) will be responsible
for inspecting them for security risks and vetting the plugins as safe
to use. Installers will be able to either use a published allowlist,

> vendor specific provider plugin versions or reimplement them at their

Reviewer: I'd add "use them as a Python library", as opposed to going through the query interface, for clarity that these won't have the performance overhead and will have a good Python interface.

leisure.

This will lead to the majority of packages focusing on these specific
plugins, rather than implementing competing solutions. Plugins requiring
explicit opt-in should be rare, and primarily affect expert users. This
is important, as many users are not expected to have sufficient

> expertise to judge plugins' trustworthiness. Furthermore, the frequent

Reviewer: I wouldn't phrase it as a lack of skill, but as being secure-by-default

> disruption of workflows would inevitably lead to a number of users

Reviewer: I'd just go by the argument that frequent disruptions are an unacceptable user experience.

```suggestion
disruption of workflows incentivises users to blanket-allow all plugins (security fatigue)
```

> learning to blanket-allow all plugins, making supply chain attacks

Reviewer: I'd strike:

> making supply chain attacks trivial

Readers will already be aware that blanket-allow is bad. Instead, I'd add:

> (security fatigue)

Referencing an established term with further reading behind it.

Rejected ideas
==============

Variants being entirely or transitionally opt-in
------------------------------------------------

In discussing the security concerns, proposals were made to make variant
provider usage entirely opt-in, either permanently, or at least
initially to facilitate further testing. While such approaches may

> naively avoid the immediate security risks by avoiding the new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
avoid the immediate security risks by avoiding the new
```

functionality by default, they are not suitable as long-term solutions.

Most importantly, the opt-in mechanism would lead to far worse user
experience out-of-the-box. For variant-enabled packages, the default

> experience would be installing a suboptimal variant. It should be noted

Reviewer: For torch and friends, the experience may be straight up broken if the CUDA version doesn't match.

that variant-enabled packages may not only be installed directly, but
also as dependencies of other packages. Therefore, for optimal user
experience, all packages that are variant-enabled or that feature
dependencies that are variant-enabled, would have to document
appropriate installer-specific mechanisms for enabling the respective
provider plugins.

The proliferation of this experience would eventually lead to users
naively configuring their installers to enable all variant providers

> unconditionally. This in turn would effectively render the provider

Reviewer: I wouldn't frame this so confidently that this would be the outcome. I think it's equally likely that users will remain unaware or that variants fail to catch on because they fail to solve the `pip install torch` problem.

usage opt-out for a large number of users, enabling all kinds of supply
chain attacks described in the `security implications`_ section.

The authors would like to emphasize that security cannot be achieved at

> the cost of severely impaired user experience. Instead, the PEP attempts

Reviewer: :100:

to strike a balance by introducing a pool of trusted providers that are

> subject to review. The list of such providers will be maintained

Reviewer: I don't follow this sentence, where does the pool come from and who does review?

Author: See the top addition to the rationale:

> Particularly, it is expected that the most popular provider plugins will
be available out of the box, and a dedicated team of maintainers
(initially including a subset of the PEP authors) will be responsible
for inspecting them for security risks and vetting the plugins as safe
to use.

Author: Tried rewording this. Also addressed the other comments.

> centrally, both ensuring a more consistent user experience and

Reviewer: That sentence doesn't belong in the rejected ideas section.

Rejected ideas
==============

Variants being entirely or transitionally opt-in
------------------------------------------------

In discussing the security concerns, proposals were made to make variant
provider usage entirely opt-in, either permanently, or at least
initially to facilitate further testing. While such approaches may
avoid the immediate security risks by avoiding the new

> functionality by default, they are not suitable as long-term solutions.

Reviewer 2: Let's rephrase this a bit, since there are no "immediate security risks" is our stance. It is no different than any other code that's part of an installer.

Something like:

```suggestion
alter who takes responsibility of vetting the provider code, and hence the maintenance
effort or number of packages/maintainers that need to be trusted,
they are not suitable as long-term solutions.
```

Jithun Nair, Keith Kraus, Leo Fang, Mike McCarty, Nikita Shulga,
Paul Ganssle, Philip Hyunsu Cho, Robert Maynard, Vyas Ramasubramani,
and Zanie Blue.

Change history
==============

> - TBD

Reviewer 2: still a TBD here

Author: A date is supposed to go there.

>   - Added outlines for suggested tool behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Added high-level outlines of suggested implementation logic per type of packaging tool, and a diagram for installer behavior.
```
